Be it enacted by the Legislature of the state of Utah:

Section 1. Section 41-26-109 is enacted to read:

41-26-109. Autonomous Vehicles and Unaccompanied Minors Workgroup.

(1) As used in this section, "unaccompanied minor" means a person under 18 years old that is not under the supervision of an adult.

(2) There is created the Autonomous Vehicles and Unaccompanied Minors Workgroup consisting of the following members:

    (a) one member of the Senate, appointed by the president of the Senate;

    (b) one member of the House of Representatives, appointed by the speaker of the House of Representatives;

    (c) the executive director of the Department of Transportation appointed under Section 72-1-202, or the executive director's designee;

    (d) the executive director of a large public transit district as defined in Section 17B-2a-802, or the executive director's designee;

    (e) the commissioner of public safety appointed under Section 53-1-107, or the commissioner's designee;

    (f) the state superintendent of public instruction appointed under Section 53E-3-301, or the state superintendent's designee;

    (g) the director of the Division of Child and Family Services appointed under Section 62A-4a-104, or the director's designee;

    (h) four representatives of the on-demand autonomous vehicle network industry appointed by the chairs of the workgroup, including one representative from an industry group;

    (i) one representative from the Utah Private Child Care Association, designated by the executive director of the Utah Private Child Care Association;

    (j) one representative of persons with a physical disability or mobility impairment appointed by the chairs of the workgroup; and

    (k) one representative from a parent organization related to education appointed by the chairs of the workgroup.

(3) The member of the House of Representatives and the member of the Senate are the chairs of the workgroup.

(4) (a) A majority of the members of the workgroup constitutes a quorum.

    (b) The action of the majority of a quorum constitutes the action of the workgroup.

(5) A member of the workgroup may not receive compensation, benefits, per diem, or travel expenses for the member's service on the workgroup.

(6) A large public transit district as defined in Section 17B-2a-802 shall provide staff support to the workgroup.

(7) The workgroup shall review and make recommendations on the following issues:

    (a) identifying different types of on-demand autonomous vehicle networks;

    (b) unique considerations related to unaccompanied minors and on-demand autonomous vehicle networks; and

    (c) any additional issue that the workgroup determines is an important issue related to unaccompanied minors and on-demand autonomous vehicle networks.

(8) The workgroup shall present an annual report on the items described in Subsection (7), including any legislative recommendations, to the Transportation Interim Committee, with a final report on or before September 30, 2022.

Section 2. Section 63I-2-241 is enacted to read:

63I-2-241. Repeal dates -- Title 41.

Section 41-26-109 is repealed on January 1, 2023.
