Be it enacted by the Legislature of the state of Utah:

Section 1. Section 53-25-601 is enacted to read:
Part 6. Law Enforcement Agency Procedure Requirements 53-25-601. Definitions.

As used in this part:

    (1) "Artificial intelligence" means a machine-based system that can, for a given set of human-defined objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual environments.

    (2) "Generative artificial intelligence" means artificial intelligence technology that is capable of creating content such as text, audio, image, or video based on patterns learned from large volumes of data rather than being explicitly programmed with rules.

Section 2. Section 53-25-602 is enacted to read:
53-25-602. Use of generative artificial intelligence by law enforcement -- Policy -- Requirements.

    (1)(a) A law enforcement agency shall have a policy concerning the use of generative artificial intelligence by employees of the law enforcement agency in the course and scope of the law enforcement agency's work.

    (b) The policy described in Subsection (1)(a) shall:

        (i) include the requirements described in Subsection (2); and

        (ii) provide employees of the law enforcement agency with information concerning the use of generative artificial intelligence, including:

            (A) which generative artificial intelligence technologies the employees of the law enforcement agency may use;

            (B) the uses and tasks for which generative artificial intelligence is permitted;

            (C) the importance of reviewing content generated by generative artificial intelligence; and

            (D) an acknowledgment that a violation of the policy described in Subsection (1)(a) may result in administrative disciplinary action by the head of the law enforcement agency.

    (2) A written police report or other law enforcement record that was created wholly or partially by using generative artificial intelligence shall:

        (a) contain within the report or record a disclaimer that the report or record contains content generated by artificial intelligence; and

        (b) include a certification by the author of the report or record that the author has read and reviewed the report or record for accuracy.

Section 3. Effective Date.
This bill takes effect on May 7, 2025.
