The people of the State of California do enact as follows:

SECTION 1. Chapter 15.5 (commencing with Section 4999.8) is added to Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code, to read:

Chapter 15.5. Health Advice From Artificial Intelligence

4999.8. For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

(a) "Artificial intelligence" or "AI" has the same meaning as set forth in Section 11546.45.5 of the Government Code.

(b) "Generative artificial intelligence" or "GenAI" has the same meaning as set forth in Section 11549.64 of the Government Code.

(c) "Health care profession" means any profession that is the subject of licensure or regulation under this division or under any initiative act referred to in this division.

4999.9. (a) (1) A violation of this chapter is subject to the jurisdiction of the appropriate health care professional licensing board or enforcement agency.

	(2) The appropriate health care professional licensing board may pursue an injunction or restraining order to enforce the provisions of this chapter, as authorized by Section 125.5.

	(3) Nothing in this section limits the authority for a health care professional licensing board or enforcement agency to pursue any remedy otherwise authorized under the law.

(b) Any provision of this division that prohibits the use of specified terms, letters, or phrases to indicate or imply possession of a license or certificate to practice a health care profession, without at that time having the appropriate license or certificate required for that practice or profession, shall be enforceable against a person or entity who develops or deploys a system or device that uses one or more of those terms, letters, or phrases in the advertising or functionality of an artificial intelligence or generative artificial intelligence system, program, device, or similar technology.

(c) The use of a term, letter, or phrase in the advertising or functionality of an AI or GenAI system, program, device, or similar technology that indicates or implies that the care, advice, reports, or assessments being offered through the AI or GenAI technology is being provided by a natural person in possession of the appropriate license or certificate to practice as a health care professional, is prohibited.

(d) Each use of a prohibited term, letter, or phrase shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter.

SEC. 2. No reimbursement is required by this act pursuant to Section 6 of Article XIII B of the California Constitution because the only costs that may be incurred by a local agency or school district will be incurred because this act creates a new crime or infraction, eliminates a crime or infraction, or changes the penalty for a crime or infraction, within the meaning of Section 17556 of the Government Code, or changes the definition of a crime within the meaning of Section 6 of Article XIII B of the California Constitution.
