Section 5. Section 72-14-102 is amended to read:
    
72-14-102. Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

(1) (a) "Advanced air mobility system" means a system that transports individuals and property using piloted and unpiloted aircraft, including electric aircraft and electric vertical takeoff and landing aircraft, in controlled or uncontrolled airspace.

   (b) "Advanced air mobility system" includes each component of a system described in Subsection (1)(a), including:
      (i) the aircraft, including payload;
      (ii) communications equipment;
      (iii) navigation equipment;
      (iv) controllers;
      (v) support equipment; and
      (vi) remote and autonomous functions.

(2) "Airport" means the same as that term is defined in Section 72-10-102.

(3) "Airport operator" means the same as that term is defined in Section 72-10-102.

(4) "Correctional facility" means the same as that term is defined in Section 77-16b-102.

(5) "Unmanned aircraft" means an aircraft that is:
   (a) capable of sustaining flight; and
   (b) operated with no possible direct human intervention from on or within the aircraft.

(6) "Unmanned aircraft system" means the entire system used to operate an unmanned aircraft, including:
   (a) the unmanned aircraft, including payload;
   (b) communications equipment;
   (c) navigation equipment;
   (d) controllers;
   (e) support equipment; and
   (f) autopilot functionality.

Section 6. Section 72-14-103 is amended to read:
72-14-103. Preemption of local ordinance.

(1) A political subdivision of the state, or an entity within a political subdivision of the state, may not enact a law, ordinance, or rule governing the private use of an unmanned aircraft or the private use of an advanced air mobility system, unless:

   (a) authorized by this chapter; or

   (b) the political subdivision or entity is an airport operator that enacts the law, rule, or ordinance to govern:
      (i) the operation of an unmanned aircraft or an advanced air mobility system within the geographic boundaries of the airport over which the airport operator has authority; or
      (ii) the takeoff or landing of an unmanned aircraft or an aircraft operated as part of an advanced air mobility system at the airport over which the airport operator has authority.

(2) This chapter supersedes any law, ordinance, or rule enacted by a political subdivision of the state before July 1, 2017.
