Be it enacted by the Legislature of the state of Utah:

Section 1. Section 36-29-113 is enacted to read:

36-29-113. Artificial Intelligence in Education Task Force.

(1) As used in this section:

    (a) "Office" means the Office of Artificial Intelligence Policy described in Section 13-70-201.

    (b) "Task force" means the Artificial Intelligence in Education Task Force created in Subsection (2).

(2) This section creates the Artificial Intelligence in Education Task Force.

(3) The task force shall consist of the following members:

    (a) one member of the House of Representatives whom the speaker of the House of Representatives appoints;

    (b) one member of the Senate whom the president of the Senate appoints;

    (c) the director of the Office of Artificial Intelligence Policy or the director's designee;

    (d) two members whom the chair of the State Board of Education appoints;

    (e) the commissioner of higher education or the commissioner's designee;

    (f) one member who is a teacher at a school within a local education agency whom the chair of the State Board of Education appoints;

    (g) one member who is an administrator at a school within a local education agency whom the chair of the State Board of Education appoints;

    (h) two members who are employed at a higher education institution in Utah that the chair of the Utah Board of Higher Education appoints;

    (i) the chief privacy officer described in Section 63A-19-302, or the chief privacy officer's designee who has professional expertise in data privacy, including student data privacy; and

    (j) one industry expert in artificial intelligence whom the director of the Office of Artificial Intelligence Policy appoints.

(4) The task force shall select a chair and vice-chair from among its members.

(5) A majority of the task force members constitutes a quorum for conducting task force business.

(6) A member shall serve a term of four years.

(7) When a vacancy occurs in the membership for any reason, the respective appointing authority shall appoint a replacement for the unexpired term.

(8) A non-legislative member may not receive compensation or benefits for the member's service but may receive per diem and travel expenses as allowed in:

    (a) Section 63A-3-106;

    (b) Section 63A-3-107; and

    (c) rules that the Division of Finance makes according to Sections 63A-3-106 and 63A-3-107.

(9) The Office of Legislative Research and General Counsel shall provide staff support to the task force.

(10) The task force shall:

    (a) study and make recommendations to the Legislature, public education institutions, and higher education institutions on:

        (i) policies related to the use of artificial intelligence in education;

        (ii) guidelines for the implementation of artificial intelligence technologies in educational settings;

        (iii) protections for student privacy and data security in the context of artificial intelligence use;

        (iv) strategies for maximizing the beneficial uses of artificial intelligence in both public education and higher education;

        (v) promoting artificial intelligence literacy among students and staff;

        (vi) addressing potential risks associated with artificial intelligence use in education, including misinformation and bias;

        (vii) maintaining student and teacher agency when using artificial intelligence tools;

        (viii) advancing academic integrity in the context of artificial intelligence use; and

        (ix) ensuring equitable access to artificial intelligence tools and resources across student populations;


    (b) monitor national and international trends in artificial intelligence use in education;

    (c) identify best practices for integrating artificial intelligence into curriculum and instruction;

    (d) explore opportunities for collaboration between educational institutions and the artificial intelligence industry; and

    (e) coordinate efforts with the Office of Artificial Intelligence Policy to ensure alignment with statewide artificial intelligence initiatives.

(11) The task force shall meet at least quarterly.

(12) The chair of the task force may call additional meetings as necessary.

(13) The task force shall comply with Title 52, Chapter 4, Open and Public Meetings Act.

(14) The task force shall submit an annual report to the Education Interim Committee and the Higher Education Appropriations Subcommittee by November 30 of each year, summarizing the task force's activities and recommendations.

Section 2. Section 63I-1-236 is amended to read:

63I-1-236. Repeal dates: Title 36.

(1) Title 36, Chapter 17, Legislative Process Committee, is repealed January 1, 2028.

(2) Section 36-29-111, Public Safety Data Management Task Force, is repealed July 1, 2029.

(3) Title 36, Chapter 28, Veterans and Military Affairs Commission, is repealed January 1, 2030.

(4) Section 36-29-112, Justice Court Reform Task Force, is repealed July 1, 2025.

(5) Section 36-29-113, Artificial Intelligence in Education Task Force, is repealed July 1, 2028.

Section 3. Effective date.

This bill takes effect on July 1, 2025.
