
TITLE V--AERONAUTICS

SEC. 501. DEFINITIONS.

    In this title:

            (1) Advanced air mobility; aam.--The terms ``advanced air 
        mobility'' and ``AAM'' mean a transportation system that is 
        comprised of urban air mobility and regional air mobility using 
        manned or unmanned aircraft.

            (2) Regional air mobility.--The term ``regional air 
        mobility'' means the movement of passengers or property by air 
        between 2 points using an airworthy aircraft that--

                    (A) has advanced technologies, such as distributed 
                propulsion, vertical takeoff and landing, powered lift, 
                nontraditional power systems, or autonomous 
                technologies;

                    (B) has a maximum takeoff weight of greater than 
                1,320 pounds; and

                    (C) is not urban air mobility.

            (3) Unmanned aircraft system.--The term ``unmanned aircraft 
        system'' has the meanings given such term in section 44801 of 
        title 49, United States Code.

            (4) Urban air mobility.--The term ``urban air mobility'' 
        means the movement of passengers or property by air between 2 
        points in different cities or 2 points within the same city 
        using an airworthy aircraft that--

                    (A) has advanced technologies, such as distributed 
                propulsion, vertical takeoff and landing, powered lift, 
                nontraditional power systems, or autonomous 
                technologies; and

                    (B) has a maximum takeoff weight of greater than 
                1,320 pounds.

SEC. 502. HYPERSONIC RESEARCH.

    (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--

            (1) basic and applied hypersonic research--

                    (A) is critical for enabling the development of 
                advanced high-speed aeronautical and space systems; and

                    (B) can improve understanding of technical 
                challenges related to high-speed and reusable vehicle 
                technologies, including those related to propulsion, 
                noise, advanced materials, and entry, descent, and 
                landing operations;

            (2) investments in hypersonic research are critical to 
        sustaining United States global leadership in space and 
        aeronautics; and

            (3) NASA efforts to study hypersonic research--

                    (A) should not duplicate, and may complement, 
                research supported by the Department of Defense; and

                    (B) should be conducted in partnership with 
                universities and industry, as appropriate.

    (b) Hypersonic Research.--The Administrator, in coordination with 
the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration and the 
Secretary of Defense, as appropriate, and in consultation with industry 
and academia, shall continue to carry out basic and applied hypersonic 
research.

    (c) Hypersonic Research Roadmap.--

            (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
        the enactment of this Act, the Administrator, in consultation 
        with the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration, 
        the Secretary of Defense, industry, and academic institutions, 
        shall update the hypersonic research roadmap required under 
        section 603 of the National Aeronautics and Space 
        Administration Transition Authorization Act of 2017 (Public Law 
        115-10; 131 Stat. 55).

            (2) Considerations.--In updating the research roadmap, the 
        Administrator may consider--

                    (A) advancements in--

                            (i) system level design, analysis, and 
                        validation of hypersonic aircraft technologies;

                            (ii) propulsion capabilities and 
                        technologies;

                            (iii) vehicle technologies, including 
                        vehicle flow physics and vehicle thermal 
                        management associated with aerodynamic heating;

                            (iv)(I) advanced materials, including 
                        materials capable of withstanding high 
                        temperatures;

                            (II) demonstrating durable materials; and

                            (III) efforts to apply such materials; and

                            (v) other areas of hypersonic research as 
                        determined appropriate by the Administrator; 
                        and

                    (B) data trends regarding sonic boom overpressures 
                associated with hypersonic aircraft.

    (d) Report and Briefing.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall--

            (1) submit to the appropriate committees of Congress the 
        updated research roadmap under subsection (c); and

            (2) provide the appropriate committees of Congress with a 
        briefing on the research conducted under subsection (b), 
        including with respect to the manner in which such research 
        aligns with such updated research roadmap.

SEC. 503. ADVANCED MATERIALS AND MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGY.

    (a) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall submit to the 
appropriate committees of Congress a report on the status of NASA 
activities relating to subsections (e) and (f) of section 10831 of the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2022 
(Public Law 117-167; 51 U.S.C. 40102 note).

    (b) Update and Briefing.--Not later than 2 years after the date on 
which the report required by subsection (a) is submitted, the 
Administrator shall--

            (1) submit to the appropriate committees of Congress an 
        update to the findings contained in such report; and

            (2) provide the appropriate committees of Congress with a 
        briefing on such update.

SEC. 504. UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEM AND ADVANCED AIR MOBILITY.

    The Administrator shall continue research, as appropriate and 
necessary, in collaboration with the Administrator of Federal Aviation 
Administration, the heads of other relevant Federal agencies, and 
appropriate representatives of academia and industry, on unmanned 
aircraft systems and advanced air mobility.

SEC. 505. ADVANCED CAPABILITIES FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSE OPERATIONS.

    (a) In General.--The Administrator may continue to conduct research 
and development activities under the Advanced Capabilities for 
Emergency Response Operations (ACERO) project, or appropriate successor 
project or projects, to improve aerial responses to wildfires.
    (b) Briefing.--

            (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of 
        the enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall provide the 
        appropriate committees of Congress with a briefing on ongoing 
        research and development activities related to improving aerial 
        responses to wildfires.

            (2) Elements.--The briefing required by paragraph (1) shall 
        include the following:

                    (A) An identification of any topic related to 
                improvement of aerial responses to wildfires that could 
                benefit from further research.

                    (B) A description of collaboration with other 
                relevant Federal agencies.

                    (C) A description of any continuing efforts under 
                this section.

                    (D) Any other information the Administrator 
                considers appropriate.

SEC. 506. HYDROGEN AVIATION.

    (a) In General.--Subject to the availability of appropriations for 
such purpose, the Administrator may carry out research on emerging 
technologies related to hydrogen aviation.

    (b) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall provide the appropriate 
committees of Congress with a briefing on the ongoing research under 
subsection (a) that includes--

            (1) an identification of any agency with which NASA has 
        partnered on such research; and

            (2) a description of anticipated further actions and 
        activities related to the topic of hydrogen aviation.

SEC. 507. HIGH-PERFORMANCE CHASE AIRCRAFT.

    (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--

            (1) NASA programs benefit from and rely upon high-
        performance chase aircraft for providing research and mission 
        support; and

            (2) NASA currently faces maintenance challenges related to 
        its aging high-performance aircraft fleet, which is resulting 
        in increased program costs.

    (b) Briefing.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, and biannually thereafter, the Administrator 
shall provide the appropriate committees of Congress with a briefing on 
the strategy of NASA relating to the following:

            (1) Collaboration with the Department of Defense on efforts 
        for research and flight asset sharing to support NASA's 

        research mission support and pilot training requirements.
            (2) Efforts to seek aircraft parts and engines to keep 
        NASA's current fleet of chase aircraft operational, including 
        potential use of 3D additive manufactured parts.

            (3) Strategies for acquiring or using through loan, 
        sharing, or other agreements, as appropriate, Department of 
        Defense aircraft to support NASA's research and mission support 
        activities, as required.

SEC. 508. COLLABORATION WITH ACADEMIA.

    It is the sense of Congress that--

            (1) colleges and universities are hubs of research and 
        innovation, with expertise in various fields of science and 
        aeronautics;

            (2) collaborating with academia allows NASA to access 
        cutting-edge research and expertise that can further enable 
        advancements in aeronautics research and technology and address 
        complex aeronautical challenges;

            (3) a cutting-edge civil aeronautics research and 
        development program can inspire the next generation to pursue 
        education and careers in science, technology, engineering, and 
        mathematics, including aeronautics; and

            (4) opportunities for students to participate in NASA-
        supported academic research and development projects, such as 
        the University Leadership Initiative, the University Students 
        Research Challenge, the National Space Grant College and 
        Fellowship Project, and related aeronautic projects and 
        competitions, contributes to training the next generation and 
        developing the aeronautics workforce to support continued 
        United States leadership and economic growth in civil 
        aeronautics and aviation.
