TITLE V--AERONAUTICS

SEC. 501. DEFINITIONS.

    In this title:
            (1) Advanced air mobility; aam.--The terms ``advanced air 
        mobility'' and ``AAM'' mean a transportation system that is 
        comprised of urban air mobility and regional air mobility using 
        manned or unmanned aircraft.
        
            (2) Regional air mobility.--The term ``regional air 
        mobility'' means the movement of passengers or property by air 
        between 2 points using an airworthy aircraft that--
        
                    (A) has advanced technologies, such as distributed 
                propulsion, vertical takeoff and landing, powered lift, 
                nontraditional power systems, or autonomous 
                technologies;
                
                    (B) has a maximum takeoff weight of greater than 
                1,320 pounds; and
                
                    (C) is not urban air mobility.
                    
(3) Unmanned aircraft.--The term ``unmanned aircraft'' 
        means an aircraft that is operated without the possibility of 
        direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft.
        
            (4) Unmanned aircraft system.--The term ``unmanned aircraft 
        system'' means an unmanned aircraft and associated elements 
        (including communication links and the components that control 
        the unmanned aircraft) that are required for the operator to 
        operate safely and efficiently in the national airspace system.
        
(5) Urban air mobility.--The term ``urban air mobility'' 
        means the movement of passengers or property by air between 2 
        points in different cities or 2 points within the same city 
        using an airworthy aircraft that--
        
                    (A) has advanced technologies, such as distributed 
                propulsion, vertical takeoff and landing, powered lift, 
                nontraditional power systems, or autonomous 
                technologies; and
                
                    (B) has a maximum takeoff weight of greater than 
                1,320 pounds.
                
            (6) UTM.--The term ``UTM'' means an unmanned aircraft 
        system traffic management system or service.

SEC. 502. EXPERIMENTAL AIRCRAFT DEMONSTRATIONS.

    (a) Study.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Administrator, in consultation with industry and 
academia, shall conduct a study of NASA's administration of past and 
ongoing NASA experimental aircraft demonstrator projects.

    (b) Future Demonstrations.--The study under subsection (a) shall 
include an identification of flight research activities, systems, 
capabilities, and technologies that could be viable candidates for 
experimental aircraft demonstrator projects. Such activities, systems, 
capabilities, and technologies may include technological advancements 
related to structures, aerodynamics, propulsion, controls, and 
autonomous capabilities. The study shall include a description of 
criteria and performance metrics used to determine the readiness of an 
activity, system, capability, or technology for incorporation into an 
experimental aircraft demonstrator project.

(c) Lessons Learned.--The study under subsection (a) also shall 
include an assessment of lessons learned from NASA's administration of 
past and ongoing experimental aircraft demonstration projects over the 
last decade, including the projects set forth under section 10831 of 
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 
2022 (Public Law 117-167). Such assessment shall include--

            (1) a quantitative assessment of each experimental aircraft 
        demonstration project's ability to meet cost, schedule and 
        performance goals, as defined at the time of project 
        confirmation;
        
            (2) the extent to which each project's objectives or 
        performance goals were changed or descoped, and the rationale 
        for such change or descoping;
        
            (3) the extent to which the system, capability, or 
        technology that was the subject of each project was matured as 
        a result of its demonstration on an experimental aircraft 
        demonstrator; and
        
            (4) the extent to which each project has contributed, or is 
        likely to contribute in the future, to advancing the 
        capabilities of and innovation in the United States aircraft 
        and aviation industries.

SEC. 503. HYPERSONICS RESEARCH.

    (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
    
            (1) basic and applied hypersonics research--
            
                    (A) is critical for enabling the development of 
                advanced high-speed aeronautical and space systems; and
                
                    (B) can improve understanding of technical 
                challenges related to high-speed and reusable vehicle 
                technologies, including those related to propulsion, 
                noise, advanced materials, and entry, descent, and 
                landing operations;
                
            (2) investments in hypersonics research are critical to 
        sustaining United States global leadership in space and 
        aeronautics; and
        
            (3) NASA efforts to study hypersonics research should 
        complement research supported by the Department of Defense and, 
        when appropriate, be conducted in partnership with universities 
        and industry.
        
(b) Hypersonics Research.--The Administrator, in coordination with 
the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration and the 
Secretary of the Department of Defense, and in consultation with 
industry and academia, shall continue to carry out basic and applied 
hypersonics research.

(c) Hypersonics Research Roadmap.--Not later than 180 days after 
the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator, in 
consultation with the Administrator of the Federal Aviation 
Administration and the Secretary of the Department of Defense, and with 
industry and academic institutions, shall update the hypersonics 
research roadmap required under section 603 of the National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration Transition Authorization Act of 2017 (Public 
Law 115-10; 51 U.S.C. 20302 note). In updating the research roadmap, 
the Administrator may consider advancements in--

            (1) system level design, analysis, and validation of 
        hypersonics aircraft technologies;
        
            (2) propulsion capabilities and technologies;
            
            (3) vehicle technologies, including vehicle flow physics 
        and vehicle thermal management associated with aerodynamic 
        heating;
        
            (4) advanced materials, including materials capable of 
        withstanding high temperatures and demonstrating durable 
        materials, and efforts to create models and simulate use of 
        such materials; and
        
            (5) other areas of hypersonics research as determined 
        appropriate by the Administrator.
        
(d) Report and Briefing.--Not later than one year after the date of 
the enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall--

            (1) transmit the updated research roadmap under subsection 
        (c) to the appropriate committees of Congress; and
        
            (2) provide a briefing on the research conducted under 
        subsection (b), including how such research aligns with the 
        updated research roadmap under subsection (c).

SEC. 504. ADVANCED MATERIALS AND MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGY.

    Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act 
and annually thereafter, the Administrator shall submit to the 
appropriate committees of Congress a report on the status of NASA 
activities pursuant to subsections (e) and (f) of section 10831 of the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2022 
(Public Law 117-167; 51 U.S.C. 40102 note; relating to the advanced 
materials and manufacturing technology program and research 
partnerships, respectively), as well as other NASA activities.

SEC. 505. UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS AND ADVANCED AIR MOBILITY.

    (a) Finding.--Congress finds that research and development related 
to autonomous aviation is vital to ensure United States competitiveness 
as the National Airspace System evolves from trajectory-based 
operations to collaborative and highly automated operations.

    (b) Collaboration.--The Administrator shall, in collaboration with 
the Administrator of Federal Aviation Administration, the heads of 
other relevant Federal agencies, and appropriate representatives of 
academia and industry, continue its research on unmanned aircraft 
systems and advanced air mobility, including research related to UTM 
and autonomous capabilities, as practicable.

    (c) Brief.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall brief the appropriate 
committees of Congress on the progress of the research under subsection 
(b).

SEC. 506. ADVANCED CAPABILITIES FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSE OPERATIONS.

    (a) In General.--The Administrator shall leverage NASA-developed 
tools and technologies to conduct research and development activities 
under the Advanced Capabilities for Emergency Response Operations 
(ACERO) project, or appropriate successor project or projects, to 
improve aerial responses to wildfires.

    (b) Goals.--The research and development activities conducted under 
subsection (a) may include the following:
	
            (1) Advanced aircraft technologies and airspace management 
        efforts to assist in the management, deconfliction, and 
        coordination of aerial assets during wildfire response efforts.
        
            (2) Information sharing and real-time data exchange for 
        wildfire response teams.
        
            (3) Development of an interoperable platform to provide 
        situational awareness of aerial assets during wildfire 
        response.
        
            (4) Establishment of a multi-agency concept of operations, 
        which may involve Federal, State, and local government 
        agencies, to enable coordination of aerial activities for 
        wildfire response.
        
(c) Collaboration.--In carrying out this section, the 
Administrator--

            (1) may coordinate and collaborate with other Federal, 
        State, and local government agencies, regional organizations, 
        and commercial partners and academic institutions involved in 
        wildfire management; and
        
            (2) shall, to the maximum extent practicable, consult with 
        the heads of other Federal departments and agencies to avoid 
        duplication of activities.
        
(d) Prohibition.--
    
            (1) In general.--Except as provided in this subsection, the 
        Administrator may not procure an unmanned aircraft system to 
        conduct activities described in this section if such unmanned 
        aircraft system is manufactured or assembled by a covered 
        foreign entity.
        
            (2) Exemption.--The Administrator may waive the prohibition 
        under paragraph (1) on a case-by-case basis if the 
        Administrator--
        
                    (A) determines that the procurement of an unmanned 
                aircraft system is--
                
                            (i) in the national interest of the United 
                        States; and
                        
                            (ii) necessary for the sole purpose of 
                        improving aerial responses to wildfires; and
                        
                    (B) notifies the appropriate committees of Congress 
                not later than 30 days after a determination in the 
                affirmative under subparagraph (A).
                
(e) Annual Reports.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act and annually thereafter until December 31, 2031, 
the Administrator shall submit to the appropriate committees of 
Congress a report describing the activities, including results, carried 
out pursuant to this section. Each such report, at minimum, shall 
contain the following:
	
            (1) A description of any research and development 
        activities.
        
            (2) A description of the Administrator's activities 
        pursuant to subsection (c).
        
            (3) An identification of any topics related to improvement 
        of aerial responses to wildfires that could benefit from 
        further research.
        
            (4) A description of any continuing efforts under this 
        section.
        
            (5) Any other information determined appropriate by the 
        Administrator.
        
    (f) Definition.--In this section, the term ``covered foreign 
entity'' has the meaning given such term in section 1832 of the 
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2024 (Public Law 
118-31).

SEC. 507. HYDROGEN AVIATION.

    (a) In General.--Subject to the availability of appropriations for 
such purpose, and taking into consideration the strategy developed 
under and research conducted pursuant to section 1019 of the FAA 
Reauthorization Act of 2024 (Public Law 118-63), the Administrator may 
carry out research on emerging technologies related to hydrogen 
aviation.

    (b) Report.--Not later than two years after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall submit to the 
appropriate committees of Congress a report on NASA research activities 
under subsection (a) and any associated findings.

SEC. 508. HIGH-PERFORMANCE CHASE AIRCRAFT.

    (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
    
            (1) NASA programs benefit from and rely upon high-
        performance chase aircraft for providing research and mission 
        support; and
        
            (2) NASA currently faces maintenance challenges related to 
        its aging high-performance aircraft fleet, which is resulting 
        in increased program costs.
        
(b) Briefing.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the 
enactment of this Act and biannually thereafter, the Administrator 
shall provide to the appropriate committees of Congress a briefing on 
the strategy of NASA relating to the following:
	
            (1) Collaboration with the Department of Defense on efforts 
        for research and flight asset sharing to support NASA's 
        research mission support and pilot training requirements.
        
            (2) Efforts to seek aircraft parts and engines to keep 
        NASA's current fleet of chase aircraft operational, including 
        potential use of 3D additive manufactured parts.
        
            (3) Strategies for acquiring or using through loan, 
        sharing, or other agreements, as appropriate, Department of 
        Defense aircraft to support NASA's research and mission support 
        activities, as required.

SEC. 509. COLLABORATION WITH ACADEMIA.

    It is the sense of Congress that--
    
            (1) colleges and universities are hubs of research and 
        innovation, with expertise in various fields of science and 
        aeronautics;
        
            (2) collaborating with academia allows NASA to access 
        cutting-edge research and expertise that can further enable 
        advancements in aeronautics research and technology and address 
        complex aeronautical challenges;
        
(3) a cutting-edge civil aeronautics research and 
        development program can inspire the next generation to pursue 
        education and careers in science, technology, engineering, and 
        mathematics, including aeronautics; and
        
            (4) opportunities for students to participate in NASA-
        supported academic research and development projects, such as 
        the University Leadership Initiative, the University Students 
        Research Challenge, and related aeronautic projects and 
        competitions, contributes to training the next generation and 
        developing the aeronautics workforce to support continued 
        United States leadership and economic growth in civil 
        aeronautics and aviation.

SEC. 510. DECADAL SURVEY FOR NATIONAL AERONAUTICS RESEARCH.

    (a) Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that--
    
            (1) engaging the science and engineering communities, along 
        with industry, through the development of a National Academies 
        of Science, Engineering, and Medicine decadal survey in 
        aeronautics research and development can provide a science and 
        engineering community consensus on key research and development 
        priorities in national civil aeronautics programs;
        
            (2) a decadal survey--
            
                    (A) entails a comprehensive review of and strategy 
                and priorities for civil national aeronautics research 
                and development; and
                
                    (B) prioritizes such research and development for 
                the next decade; and
                
            (3) a decadal survey for civil aeronautics research and 
        development can serve as a guiding framework for NASA's and 
        other relevant Federal agencies' strategic planning and 
        resource allocation in the field of civil aeronautics research 
        and development for the coming decade.
        
(b) Findings.--Congress finds that--
    
            (1) in title 51, United States Code, sections addressing 
        NASA's decadal surveys for aeronautics research include 
        sections 20305 and 40703; and
        
            (2) the most recent National Academies' Decadal Survey of 
        Civil Aeronautics was published in 2006.
        
    (c) Study.--In accordance with section 20305 of title 51, United 
States Code, the Administrator, in consultation with the heads of other 
relevant Federal Government agencies, as appropriate, shall enter into 
an arrangement with the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, 
and Medicine to conduct a decadal survey of civil aeronautics research 
for the 2026 through 2036 decade. The survey shall recommend research 
and programmatic priorities to sustain United States leadership in 
civil aeronautics research and development and support a safe and 
sustainable future for aviation. The survey may also include 
recommendations for the following:
	
            (1) Enabling innovation.
            
            (2) Ensuring a world-class workforce for aeronautics 
        research and development and related United States commercial 
        industries and activities.
        
            (3) The dissemination and transition of such research and 
        development to the United States commercial aviation and 
        aircraft industries.
        
    (d) Transmittal.--Not later than two years after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall submit to the 
appropriate committees of Congress the results of such survey, 
including any recommendations.

SEC. 511. MAKING ADVANCEMENTS IN COMMERCIAL HYPERSONICS.

    (a) In General.--In conducting the hypersonics research in 
accordance with section 40112(d) of title 51, United States Code, the 
Administrator may establish the Making Advancements in Commercial 
Hypersonics Program (in this section referred to as the ``Program''), 
which shall facilitate opportunities for testing of high-speed aircraft 
and other technologies that advance scientific research and technology 
development related to hypersonic aircraft.

    (b) Limitation.--The Program under subsection (a) shall not fund 
the development of technologies that are supported by such testing 
opportunities.

(c) Plan.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment 
of this Act, the Administrator, acting through the Aeronautics Research 
Mission Directorate, shall develop a strategic plan for activities 
under subsection (a) that aligns with the research roadmap under 
section 503 of this Act.

    (d) Coordination, Consultation and Collaboration.--
    
            (1) The Administrator shall ensure coordination between the 
        Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate and other Mission 
        Directorates, as appropriate, to identify technologies eligible 
        for testing opportunities under the Program.
        
            (2) The Administrator shall consult and seek to collaborate 
        with, as appropriate, with the Secretary of Defense and the 
        Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration on 
        activities related to the Program, including development, 
        testing, and evaluation of high-speed aircraft and related 
        technologies.
        
(e) Report.--The Administrator shall submit to the appropriate 
committees of Congress, and the Committee on Armed Services of the 
House of Representatives and the Committee on Armed Services of the 
Senate--

            (1) not later than 80 days after the date of the enactment 
        of this section, a report that--
        
                    (A) describes activities of the program established 
                under subsection (a); and
                
                    (B) includes the strategic plan produced under 
                subsection (c); and
                
            (2) not later than one year after the date of the enactment 
        of this Act and annually thereafter, a report describing 
        progress in carrying out the program, including the number and 
        type of testing opportunities executed in the previous fiscal 
        year and planned for the upcoming fiscal year.
        
    (f) Research Security.--Nothing under this section authorizes the 
Administrator to develop, implement, or execute an agreement related to 
technologies under this section with any entity of concern, a foreign 
business entity, or a foreign country of concern.

(g) Definitions.--In this section--
    
            (1) Entity of concern.--The term ``entity of concern'' has 
        the meaning given such term in section 10114 of the Research 
        and Development, Competition, and Innovation Act (Public Law 
        117-167; 42 U.S.C. 18912).
        
            (2) Foreign business entity.--The term ``foreign business 
        entity'' means an entity that is majority-owned or majority-
        controlled (as such term is defined in section 800.208 of title 
        31, Code of Federal Regulations, or a successor regulation), or 
        minority owned greater than 25 percent by--
        
                    (A) any governmental organization of a foreign 
                country of concern; or
                
                    (B) any other entity that is--
                    
                            (i) known to be owned or controlled by any 
                        governmental organization of a foreign country 
                        of concern; or
                        
                            (ii) organized under, or otherwise subject 
                        to, the laws of a foreign country of concern.
                        
(3) Foreign country of concern.--The term ``foreign country 
        of concern'' has the meaning given such term in section 9901 of 
        title XCIX of division H of the William M. (Mac) Thornberry 
        National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021 (15 
        U.S.C. 4651).
        
            (4) High-speed aircraft.--The term ``high-speed aircraft'' 
        means an aircraft operating at speeds in excess of Mach 1, 
        including supersonic and hypersonic aircraft.
        
            (5) Hypersonic.--The term ``hypersonic'' means flights 
        operating at speeds that exceed Mach 5.
        
            (6) Supersonic.--The term ``supersonic'' means flights 
        operating at speeds in excess of Mach 1 but less than Mach 5.
